        ออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออ

                               Impulse Software
                                     and
                                Absolute Magic
                                   present

                                  T U B E S

        ออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออ

        Tubes: The Story
        ออออออออออออออออ

             In a lab far far away in the Great White North...

             Dr.  Lanny  B.  Brilliant  was  completing  his work on the
        creation  of  8  new  elements  not yet included on the periodic
        table.  After  going  over  his Nobel Prize acceptance speech in
        his head...

             Suddenly his future didn't seem so bright...

             Lanny  hadn't  researched  his  new elements enough to have
        discovered  they  were  highly unstable.  Before he could react,
        they  were  everywhere.  He  had  nothing  for  the  Nobel Prize
        committee to assess.

             But  there is still hope!  Lanny knows he can stabilize the
        atoms  if he bonds 3 or more atoms of the same element together,
        forming a molecule chain.

             Maybe you can help...


        Tubes: The Game
        อออออออออออออออ

             The  object of Tubes is to keep the large beaker as free of
        atoms  as  is  possible.  This is accomplished by lining up 3 or
        more like coloured atoms in a row,  vertically, horizontally, or
        diagonally.  Use  the  test  tube you control to catch the atoms
        falling  from the dispenser tubes and place them into the beaker
        at  your  discretion.  The  game  is  over  when  you've dropped
        enough  atoms  to  exceed the drop limit,  or when you've filled
        up the beaker with atoms.


        Minimum System Requirements
        อออออออออออออออออออออออออออ

             Tubes will check to ensure your system meets the minimum
        requirements, however, here they are:

        - At least a 286 processor.  A 386, 486, or Pentium is fine.
        - 420K of free conventional memory is the minimum.  Sound
          will require an additional 65K and Music will require 25K.
          Total memory requirements are 510K.
        - A VGA card with at least 256K.  Super VGA cards are also fine.

             Tubes also supports the following hardware:

        Sound
        -PC Speaker
        -Sound Blaster

        Music
        - FM (Adlib)
        - General Midi

        Input Device
        - Joystick
        - Mouse

             At this point you might as well run Tubes by typing "TUBES"
        at the DOS prompt.

             C:\TUBES\>TUBES <Press the ENTER Key>

             Tubes will run the SetUp program so you may configure Tubes
        for your system.

             If you have any problems or wish to know more about  Tubes,
        continue reading.


        Setting Up Tubes
        ออออออออออออออออ

             Once  you  have  configured the game, you won't have to run
        the  setup  program again, unless you wish to change any of your
        previous device choices.

             Sound Effects:

             Sound  Blaster is the best selection for the sound effects,
        and  will  enable  you  to  hear  the  outstanding digital sound
        effects throughout the game.  If you do not have a Sound Blaster
        card,  the  PC  Speaker can also play the digital sound effects.
        This  method is very processor intensive and will require a very
        fast computer,  at least  a 386 running at 25mhz.  There are two
        quality modes.  "Good as it gets" will sound the best.  If Tubes
        plays very badly, your computer probably can't keep up.  Try the
        "Okay"  setting,  if  Tubes is still unplayable, then select "No
        Sound."  This method will sound really bad if your computer does
        not  use  a normal speaker (cone).  Notebooks and Laptops are an
        example of this.

             Music:

             Only  FM  music  is available.  Those with Adlib compatible
        cards  such as the Sound Blaster and it's many clones will allow
        you to hear the fantastic sound track that accompanies the game.
        There is no music available to users with no sound card.

             Input:

             The  recommended  input  method  is the joystick,  although
        some may  prefer  the  keyboard.   The  mouse  is  provided  for
        completeness, however it is not ideal for  this  type  of  game.
        The  default  Keys  for  the  Keyboard  are the cursors keys for
        movement,  CTRL  for  Button  A,  and  ALT for Button B.  Select
        Keyboard to redefine your keys if you prefer.


        Main Menu
        อออออออออ

             You  can  move  around  the  menus  with your input device.
        Button  A  selects the highlighted option,  and Button B returns
        to the previous menu.

             Start Game:

             Starts  the  game  of  Tubes.  After selecting this option,
        you  are  then  asked  to choose between Wave and Endurance mode
        which   are  the  two  styles  of  game  play  in  Tubes.  After
        selecting  the  mode  of  play,  you  must choose the difficulty
        level  -  101  is the easiest,  for beginning players because it
        allows 9 drops, 201 allows  6  drops,  and 301 is for the expert
        player  who  is  only  allowed 3 drops.  Atom speed and the rate
        that they appear is also determined by the difficulty setting.

             Continue Saved Game:

             Starts a previously saved game from where you left off.

             Preview Registered:

             Lets  you  play five waves of the deluxe registered version
        featuring the extremely helpful ANTI-MATTER and BONUS atoms..

             Game Options:

             Opens  another  menu  which  includes the options of Toggle
        Sound and/or Music, and Define Input Device.

             Instructions:

             Lanny   the   scientist   takes   you  through  a  detailed
        instructional  course  on  the  playing  of  Tubes.  Information
        packed - a must read.

             High Score:

             Displays  the  high  score  list  for  both  Wave  Mode and
        Endurance Mode.

             Ordering Info:

             Gives  the  registration  information  required to register
        Tubes.  Consult ORDER.TXT for more information.

             Credits:

             Displays  information about the two fine young men who made
        Tubes a reality.

             Exit:

             Exits the game, and returns you to your operating system.

        Tubes & Windows
        อออออออออออออออ

             Tubes should always be played from DOS.  Tubes will  detect
        a  multitasking environment when it starts up and will recommend
        you run from DOS but it won't stop you.  The game will  give  up
        time slices but it's recommended if  you  must  run  Tubes  from
        Windows that you don't run anything else at the same time.

             Windows and the digital PC SoundFX  option  should  not  be
        used together.  Tubes should work, but will be unplayable during
        a sound effect.


        Hints 'n' Tips
        ออออออออออออออ

             Playing Endurance mode is a great way to learn how to  play
        Tubes for the first time.

             Hoard  Flashium  atoms  in  the test tube until they can be
        used  most  effectively,  these are valuable atoms and shouldn't
        be wasted.

             Use  Anti-Matter  atoms  to destroy troublesome Xenon atoms
        that accumulate in the beaker.

             Try  to  create  a  4 or 5 atom chain when possible,  since
        they  count  as  2  and  3  chains respectively,  and double the
        points.

        
        Scoring
        อออออออ

                       Task                                Points

         3 Atom Vertical/Horizontal/Diagonal Chain - 250/500/1000
         4 Atom Vertical/Horizontal/Diagonal Chain - 500/1000/2000
         5 Atom Vertical/Horizontal/Diagonal Chain - 1000/2000/4000
         Catching Bonus Atom                       - 2500 x number caught
         Multiple Chain                            - Chain Values x Number
                                                     of chains

        Problems
        ออออออออ

             Tubes generates three error messages:

             "Run SETUP.EXE to configure Tubes for your System"

             Tubes  hasn't  been  setup  for  your  system.   Normally,
         Tubes will run the SetUp program  for  you,  if  it  can't  do
         that  it  displays  this  message.   The  solution is  to  run
         SETUP.EXE yourself then run TUBES.EXE again.


             "Tubes requires <some number> bytes  of  free  memory  with
         this SetUp!"

             Tubes checks how much free  conventional  memory  you  have
         when it first runs.  If you  don't  have  enough  Tubes  aborts
         with this message.  The solution is  to  free  up  more  memory
         or lower Tubes' memory requirements, for  example,  turn  sound
         and/or music off.


             "<Where ever it occurs> Resource Error!"

             It could mean many things, but 99% of  the  time  it  means
        there wasn't enough memory to  load  something  Tubes  requires.
        Although rare, it is still  possible  to  get  this  error  even
        though Tubes checks  to  ensure  you  have  enough  memory  when
        it first runs.  The solution is to free up more memory or  lower
        Tubes' memory  requirements,  for  example,  turn  sound  and/or
        music off.


        Shareware
        อออออออออ

             Tubes  is copyrighted software,  however you are encouraged
        to  copy  and freely distribute the Shareware version as long as
        all files are included.  Shareware allows you to  "try it before
        you buy it".

             Why  register?  Besides  getting  an  incredible registered
        version of Tubes,  registration will ensure future games will be
        released   and   with  the  same  high  quality.  You  are  also
        supporting  the  entire Shareware concept,  without which,  many
        excellent  programs  would  not  be available.   Neither Impulse
        Software  nor  Absolute Magic receive a penny when  you purchase
        a disk with Tubes from a Shareware Library,  or download it from
        a commercial information service,  such as CompuServe, or from a
        BBS.

             Read  the info in the game for price and other registration
        information.


        Copyright Notice
        ออออออออออออออออ

             Tubes  is  Copyright  1994 by Absolute Magic.  Tubes is the
        sole  property  of  Absolute  Magic.  All rights reserved.  Nice
        and short.


        About Tubes
        อออออออออออ

             Tubes was written in Borland Pascal  v7.  It   consists  of
        approximately  15,000  lines  of  Pascal   code   and   compiles
        completely in under 20 seconds.

            Tubes uses a planar Mode 13h commonly referred to as Mode X,
        all graphic routines were written with the  built  in  assembler
        present in  Borland  Pascal.   I  experienced  great  difficulty
        debugging the VGA graphics with planar modes being  undocumented
        so I created a utility called UNCHAIN  that  fixed  the  problem
        along with  other  VGA  related  problems  such  as  losing  the
        palette.  It's free so if you also have problems, it's out there
        somewhere.

             All of the drivers  (Music, Sound FX, Input)  were  created
        in Turbo Assembler's IDEAL  mode  and  are  loaded  at  run-time
        as need.


        About the Authors
        อออออออออออออออออ

             Absolute  Magic  is  the  figment  of our imagination.  The
        name  was  lifted  from an ancient Egyptian war chant.  Absolute
        Magic  has  been  entirely subsidized by the Canadian Government
        due  to  its  commitment  to  the  environment.  This innovative
        company  is  currently  working  on  a snow shovelling simulator
        that is so real, you'll swear your back hurts!

             If  you  absolutely  must  contact  us,   you   can   try
        "absmagic@io.org" on the Internet.  We don't check there  often,
        but we'll printout and frame your letter once we get it.


        C O L I N  B U C K L E Y:

        Birthplace: Hospital
        Place of Residence: N/A (Witness Relocation Program)
        Favorite Movies: Howard the Duck, The Sound of Music
        Favorite Books: Anything by Kierkegaard
        Favorite Foods: Brussels sprouts
        Favorite Drinks: Shamrock shakes
        Favorite Band: Abba
        Favorite Sport: Gambling
        Favorite Colour: Fuchsia
        Favorite Roadsign: Yield
        Hobbies: Surfing the Internet, Picking up trash on the Information
                 Superhighway, using buzz-words
        Turn-Ons: Trekkies
        Turn-Offs: People who don't rewind videotapes, Correct spelling
        Previous Occupation: Moonie
        Future Game Ideas: Revenge of the Big-Ass Ants

        C H R I S  B L A C K W E L L:

        Birthplace: Toronto, Ontario, Canada
        Place of Residence: Toronto, Ontario, Canada
        Favorite Movies: Reservoir Dogs, Carlito's Way, Star Wars Trilogy,
                          Evil Dead 2
        Favorite Books: Cabal, Books of Blood, 2001, Anything by Harlan
                         Ellison
        Favorite Foods: Tuna Sandwiches
        Favorite Drinks: Coke, Pink Squirrels
        Favorite Bands:  Fudge Tunnel, Clutch, Fugazi, Helmet, Tool,
                          Gush Underdrive
        Favorite Sport:  Hockey
        Favorite Colour:  N/A (Colour blind)
        Favorite Roadsign: Merge
        Hobbies:  Watching TV, Pinball, Complaining, Cursing, Being
                  annoying
        Turn-Ons: Body Shaping, Star Trek conventions
        Turn-Offs: America's Funniest People, Rewinding videotapes
        Previous Occupation: Totally Unemployable
        Future Game Ideas: Space Invaders clone

        ออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออ
