			     
			     NORTHCAD-3D PRIMER

Included on the CD-ROM of Black Art of 3D Game Programming is a fully
functional copy of a program called NorthCAD-3D. It's a wireframe CAD
program created by the CyberDesign Productions. The version of NorthCAD-3D 
provided with this book is called NCVR, and is the command you type to run 
the program. This version of NorthCAD has the built-in ability to directly 
generate PLG files; no external conversion programs are needed. Although 
this software is not "crippled" in any way, it doesn't have all the power 
and functionality of Quest's full-blown package; if you find NorthCAD 
useful, you should register your copy in order to receive the full version. 
Registration information is included on the companion disk and in the 
program itself.
	
Learning to use NorthCAD, or any other CAD package, is a gradual 
process; don't expect to become an expert overnight! However, time spent 
initially learning the package will more than pay for itself in the time it 
saves you later on when you go to create virtual objects.

NORTHCAD CONCEPTS

NorthCAD has the ability to deal with a number of objects simultaneously. 
It can also group those objects together, enabling you to manipulate them 
all at once. For example, you might create a table composed of four legs 
and a top. Each of those five objects would be independent of the others, 
but would be grouped together as a table. You could move the table as a 
unit, yet still be able to move the individual pieces around as needed.

Entities

Each NorthCAD object is made up of a set of entities. There are four types 
of entities in NorthCAD: lines, surfaces, polygons, and arcs. The most 
primitive of these are the lines and the surfaces; the higher-level entities 
(polygons and arcs) are made up of sets of lines.

NorthCAD uses a slightly different terminology from what you're used to 
in the VR world. What NorthCAD calls a "surface," we would call a polygon; 
in other words, a flat, multisided entity. NorthCAD supports three-sided 
and four-sided polygons (surfaces). What NorthCAD calls a "polygon" might 
be better described as a regular polygon (i.e., one in which all the sides 
are the same length). NorthCAD polygons can have anywhere from 3 to 20 
sides.

Notice that a NorthCAD polygon is fundamentally different from a surface; 
a surface is a solid entity, whereas a polygon is just a collection of 
lines. An arc is like a polygon, but it doesn't necessarily extend all the 
way around; in other words, an arc is like a section of a circle. Like 
polygons, arcs are made up of line segments. 

Any line (whether by itself or as part of an arc or a polygon) can have a 
color assigned to it; so can any surface. Although NorthCAD supports up to 
256 colors on a SuperVGA display, only 16 colors will be used in our 
examples. As it turns out, 16 colors is more than enough; sticking to the 
16-color modes also guarantees that you'll be able to run the examples on 
your system, regardless of what kind of VGA card you have.

Once you've created an arc or a polygon, each of its component lines can be 
manipulated independently. You can change the colors of individual line 
segments, or even delete them altogether. Similarly, you can delete 
individual surfaces from an object created by revolution or extrusion; 
more on this later.

Lines, surfaces, arcs, and polygons are all fundamentally two-dimensional 
constructs. How do you create useful three-dimensional objects from them? 
Well, NorthCAD provides two very powerful techniques for doing this.

Revolutions

A revolution is an object created by taking a two-dimensional "profile" 
and rotating it through the third dimension. In NorthCAD, you can rotate 
the profile through any angle. The profile of an object can fold back on 
itself. You can create donuts, if you want, by rotating a closed circle 
around the vertical axis.     
	
When you revolve an object in NorthCAD, it takes the lines of which that 
object is composed and turns them into surfaces in three-dimensional space. 
NorthCAD is able to revolve any shape made out of lines (including arcs and 
polygons). Because surfaces are not made out of lines, they cannot be 
revolved or extruded.

Extrusions

In addition to revolutions, NorthCAD has another very powerful feature for 
generating three-dimensional objects: extrusions. Whereas a revolution moves 
a two-dimensional shape around an axis, an extrusion moves it along a line. 
They're called extrusions because it's like plastic being extruded from a 
machine; as the hot plastic flows through a two-dimensional outline, that 
outline becomes the shape of the plastic's cross section.

Extrusions are very, very useful. For example, if you want to create a 
simple solid block, the easiest way would be to extrude a square. Creating 
a fulcrum shape can be done by extruding a triangle.

As we noted earlier, there's usually more than one way to accomplish a task. 
For example, creating a multi-sided column could be done by extrusion (by 
extruding a polygon) or by revolution (by revolving a vertical line around 
the vertical axis, thereby sweeping out a cylinder shape). Which you choose 
is up to you. 

USING NORTHCAD-3D

Let's quickly recap the key concepts of NorthCAD-3D. A drawing is made up 
of one or more objects and/or groups of objects. Each object is made up of 
entities, and each entity is a line, a surface, an arc, or a polygon. Arcs 
and polygons are made up of lines, so the most primitive drawing entities 
are lines and surfaces. Lines and surfaces can be individually recolored 
or deleted. An object that is made up entirely of lines (no surfaces) can 
be revolved or extruded to create a three-dimensional object made up of 
surfaces.

With these concepts firmly in mind, you're ready to begin actually using 
NorthCAD. Run the program by typing (in the NorthCAD directory):

ncvr

No command-line parameters are needed or used. The first thing you should 
see is a "preamble screen" that lists four alternatives.

At the bottom right is a box marked Quit Program; we'll save that one for 
last. To its left is a Program Information box; click on it to see some 
useful information describing the program and how to order the professional 
version.

At the top right is a box marked Program Configuration; this will let you 
change your resolution and number of available colors, as well as set the 
directories you want to use. For now, just leave all that as is. (If you've 
clicked on that box, click again with the right mouse button to cancel it).

The box at the top left is marked 3-D Modeling Editor; click on it now to 
enter the main part of NorthCAD-3D. Incidentally, the process of making 3D 
objects (especially with a CAD program) is often referred to as modeling. 
(In general, no makeup, runways, or fashion photographers are involved.)

Once you've selected the 3-D modeler, you'll be asked to choose "drawing 
files" or "library files." NorthCAD lets you keep objects in a separate 
directory and treat them as a library of shapes you can bring in as needed. 
For now, choose "drawing files." You could select an existing object 
(several are included on the disk) but for now just click on the box marked 
New. You'll be asked to enter a filename; for now, just type example1.

Screen Layout

You should now be in the main part of the NorthCAD program. There are three 
main areas on the screen. The largest one, of course, is the drawing area; 
for now it should be empty. The top part of the screen (above the green 
line) is the "prompt" area; you'll be asked questions there, and most 
informational messages will appear there. Finally, at the right of the 
screen, is the menu panel.
	
The contents of the menu panel will change as you use different functions 
within the program, but there are basically three parts to the panel: the 
menu, the pan/zoom icons, and the information area. The menu consists of a 
heading (which should initially be Main menu) and a number of buttons with 
labels on them. The pan/zoom area consists of eight buttons that let you 
pan in various directions, and three that let you zoom in and out. The 
information section is right below the pan/zoom icons, and should initially 
be empty.

Setting Some Options

These items will be explained in more detail soon, but for now let's just 
dive in and get started. Begin by clicking on the menu item marked 
Background. Choosing this item will present you with a selection of colors 
to use for the background in the main drawing area; try clicking on a nice 
light gray.
	
Now let's try the Settings menu. When you click on that item, the menu 
changes, and you're now presented with a new set of choices. There are 
several items at the top of the menu, then a blank, and then two more: 
Draw menu and Main menu. Clicking on Main menu will take you back to the 
menu you were on a moment ago, and Draw menu will (as you might guess) take 
you into the drawing menu. For now, however, you're just going to set a new 
graphics cursor size; click on Cursor Size and select 2 in response to the 
prompt. Now click on Main menu.

Setting the Working Object and Pen Color

So far, so good. You've set the screen background color, and selected a 
slightly larger-than-usual graphics cursor size. Now click on the Draw item 
on the Main menu.
	
The large cross in the middle of the drawing area is the graphics cursor, 
whose size you just set a moment ago. You'll notice that the menu has 
changed again, and now there's some information in the information area. 
There's also the text "NO NAME" above the menu: that means the object you're 
currently editing has not yet been assigned a name. The color of that text 
is also the current drawing color (initially, bright yellow).

Let's change these. Start by giving the current object a name; click on Work 
Object. This will present you with a menu of all the objects in your 
drawing; at the moment, there are none, so all the entries in the menu will 
be "[ ]", which means those slots are available for use. At the bottom of 
this menu are two special entries: "List -->" and "<-- List"; these advance 
you to the next page of available objects, or take you back to the previous 
one. All of these slots should be empty; click on one of them. You'll be 
prompted (on the prompt line at the top of the screen) to enter a name for 
it. For now, just enter THING1.

You'll be returned to the Main menu. Lo and behold, the name THING1 is now 
displayed above the menu. Any entities (lines, surfaces, arcs, or polys) 
that you draw at this point will be considered to be part of THING1, because 
that's your current working object. As you accumulate more objects in your 
drawing, you can switch between them using the Work Object menu item.
Now click on Pen Color. You can choose any color you like, but selecting 
the same light gray you used for the background would make things very 
confusing! Instead, choose a nice bright blue; in 16-color mode, this will 
be the blue column near the middle of the screen. You'll be returned to the 
Main menu, and now THING1 is displayed in the shade of blue you selected. 
The color of the object's name will always be the same as the current 
drawing pen color.

The Coordinate System and Viewing Directions

The coordinate system used inside NorthCAD-3D is right-handed. The x-axis 
points to the right, as always, but the y-axis points toward you and the 
z-axis points upward (they're swapped, relative to what you're used to in 
other systems). 
	
You can choose to look at your drawing from any of four possible directions: 
from the left looking right (into the positive x direction), from the right 
looking left (into the negative x direction), from above looking down (into 
the negative z direction) or from the front looking back (into the positive 
y direction). These four views are selected by the <F3>, <F4>, <F5>, and 
<F6> function keys, respectively.
	
In addition, the <F2> function key will take you back to your previous 
viewpoint and drawing plane (drawing planes are described later in the text). 
Tapping <F2> repeatedly will allow you to toggle between two different 
viewpoints on your drawing. The <F7> key will toggle perspective on and off; 
with perspective on, entities that are closer to you will appear larger than 
those farther away, and long lines running away from you will appear to 
converge.
	
While we're talking about keys, let's look at three others. <F8> will toggle 
the display of the coordinate axes on and off; when it's on, you'll see 
dashed lines on the screen that intersect at the origin. <F10> will force 
NorthCAD to redraw the entire screen; you should do this occasionally just 
to make sure what's on the screen corresponds to "reality." Finally, <F1> 
will display a help screen that tells you what all these keys do. <F9> will 
be described in a moment.

The Information Display

It's time to take a closer look at the information at the bottom right of 
the screen. You have the current x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the graphics 
cursor. Try clicking on Lines and moving the graphics cursor; notice how the 
coordinate values change as you move the mouse. Click the right mouse button, which you'll recall means "stop" or "cancel."
	
The x, y, and z have the letter a in front of them; this stands for 
absolute, meaning that the values are the actual, absolute position 
of the cursor in three-dimensional space. Later you'll see how to 
change them to be the coordinates of the cursor relative to the previously 
set point (in which case the letter a will be replaced by the letter r).

The percentage of available memory that is being used to store your drawing 
is indicated below the coordinates. This number should never get very large, 
at least not for the simple objects you'll be creating here. The number of 
drawing units that the graphics cursor will move for every step of the mouse 
is indicated next. It should be set to 50 now, which means every time you 
move the graphics cursor, its location will change by plus or minus 50. 
(Incidentally, the entire drawing area is 3,000 units in each direction.) 
If you press the <F9> function key (see, we came back to it!) you'll be 
prompted to enter a new drawing increment value.

Drawing Planes

The final item in the information box is an indication of the "Draw Plane," 
which should initially be Front-Back. The concept of a "drawing plane" is 
very important in NorthCAD. Because your mouse can only move in two 
dimensions and your drawing is in three, you need to determine which plane 
you're drawing in at any given instant. Note that your drawing plane is 
independent of your view direction, but when you set a view direction, it 
automatically sets your drawing plane as well. If you select the left-right 
view, your drawing plane will be Front-Back.
	
You can change the drawing plane by pressing the <P> key; this will cycle 
through the various planes available. There are three such planes: 
Front-Back, Top-Bottom, and Left-Right. Notice that your graphics cursor 
changes as you cycle through these options; that's because the graphics 
cursor is always oriented so as to lie in the current drawing plane. If you 
change your drawing plane without changing your viewpoint (which is what the 
<P> key does), you'll see the graphics cursor from a different angle. Seen 
face-on, it's a cross; seen from any side, it's a line.
	
Initially, you probably don't want to use the <P> key; just switch your 
viewpoint using <F3> through <F6>, and let NorthCAD automatically set your 
drawing plane for you. Changing your drawing plane and turning on 
perspective (and possibly rotating your viewpoint, which will be covered 
later) can cause your graphics cursor to move in some seemingly 
counter-intuitive ways.

Your First NorthCAD-3D Drawing

Okay, enough preparation; let's start drawing! Go to the Draw menu, make 
sure your current work object is THING1 and that your current pen color is 
bright blue. Press <F6> so you're looking at your drawing from the front 
(with x to the right, z up, and y away from you). This should also set your 
drawing plane to be Front-Back.
	
Click on Lines. The prompt at the top of the screen tells you to click on 
a starting point for a line; just click anywhere in the drawing area. Now 
move the cursor; notice how a bright yellow line seems to stretch from the 
place where you first clicked to wherever you move the graphics cursor. 
This "rubber band" effect helps you see where this line is going to go. 
Click anywhere; the yellow line should be replaced with a blue one (the 
color you selected earlier as your pen color), and from the end of this 
blue line the yellow one will stretch out again as you move the cursor. 
Repeat this procedure to form a segmented line on the screen. When you're 
finished, click the right mouse button (which you may remember means 
"stop"). 

Adding Regular Polygons

Enough lines; let's add some polygons. Click on the Polygons menu item; 
you'll be prompted to enter the number of sides you want the poly to have. 
For now, enter 12. You'll be prompted to select a point on the screen to 
use as a center for the polygon; click anywhere. At this point, you should 
have a "rubber banding" 12-sided polygon displayed in bright yellow. As you 
move the graphics cursor, you can change the size and orientation of the 
polygon; when it's placed the way you want it, click on the left mouse 
button. If you change your mind and decide you don't want to draw it, click 
with the right mouse button. 
	
Notice that every drawing operation repeats automatically; when you 
draw the polygon, you're immediately prompted to enter another center point. 
This lets you quickly create a large number of (in this case) 12-sided 
regular polygons. When you get tired of creating them, click the right 
mouse button to stop.

Drawing Arcs

Now let's add an arc. Select the Arc item from the menu. You're asked to 
select a center point for the arc, just as you did for the polygon. Click 
anywhere. You're then asked to select a starting point for the arc; you can 
again click anywhere. You now have a rubber band outline of the arc you're 
drawing; you can draw the arc either clockwise (which starts with a full 
circle and gradually makes it smaller) or counterclockwise (which starts 
with a "slice of pie" and lets you sweep out a full circle with it). When 
the arc is the way you want it, click the left mouse button; to cancel it, 
click the right mouse button.
	
Again, the operation repeats; when you click the left mouse button, you're 
immediately given a chance to create more arcs. Notice that the distance 
between the center and the starting point sets the radius of the arc. Also 
notice that a complete 360 degree arc (i.e., a full circle) has ten sides. 
If you want to create arcs with more (or fewer) sides, select the Main 
menu, then the Settings menu, then the Arc Res (arc resolution) item. 
You'll be prompted to enter a number from 6 to 20, which will be used for 
all subsequent arcs. Go back to the Draw menu.
	
Try drawing arcs and polygons of various sizes and numbers of sides. Notice 
that 360 degree arcs look the same as polygons; once you've drawn them, 
there really is no difference. Both arcs and polygons are just collections 
of line segments, in many ways no different from the first set of lines you 
drew. However, NorthCAD does treat them as distinct entities, as you'll see 
a little later.

Moving Around in Your Drawing

It's time now to look at a part of the menu panel you haven't really 
explored yet: the pan/zoom icons. Try clicking on the vertical bar in the 
middle of the top row of icons; notice how your entire drawing seems to 
move down. Now try clicking on the other vertical bar, two rows below the 
first one; the entire drawing moves back up. The other lines (the horizontal 
ones at the sides and the slanting ones at the corners) all move the drawing 
in various directions.
	
Below those buttons are two wider ones that have horizontal lines in them; 
one has vertical bars at each end, one has them in the middle. These are 
the "zoom" icons; they let you zoom in on your drawing to see more details, 
or zoom out to see the big picture. Try them out now.
	
Whenever you try to move off the edge of the drawing, or zoom in or out too 
far, you'll get a gentle beep as a reminder that you've reached the limits.

Now try clicking on the square box in the middle; you'll be prompted to 
select a zoom window. You can draw this zoom window anywhere on the screen; 
once you click the left mouse button, the contents of that window will 
expand to fill the whole screen. You can zoom in or out, or click on the 
square box again and press <R> to reset your view.

Using Files

It's now time to save this wondrous work of art. Select Files from the Main 
menu. Click on Save /DRW to save your drawing; the prompt line tells you 
when it's done. If you had selected Save /LIB, your drawing would have been 
saved to the library directory instead of the drawing directory.
	
The filename NorthCAD will use is the same one you gave when you first 
entered the program; you can change it whenever you like by selecting the 
New Filename item.
	
If you want to extract one object from your drawing and save it in its own 
file, use Extract /DRW (or Extract /LIB) instead of Save. You'll be prompted 
to select an object from the object list; at the moment, you probably only 
have THING1 there.
	
The Merge items will merge files from the drawing or library directories 
into your current drawing; nothing that you already have will be deleted, 
but new objects will be added.
	
The final item in the Files menu is Create PLG, which (as you might well 
imagine) you'll be using a lot. More about it later. For now, return to the 
Main menu and select Quit; from there, Save & Quit. This will save your 
drawing (again) and take you back to the initial screen. Now let's save 
some settings.

Saving Your Configuration

Go into the 3D Modeling Editor again, but this time select the file 
DEFAULTS.NC3 from the file list. This special file gets loaded automatically 
whenever you run NorthCAD; it can be used to store various settings. Set 
your background color as before, then go into the Settings menu and set 
your arc resolution to 16 and your cursor size to 2. Go into the Draw menu 
and set your pen color to be bright blue, as you did before. If you like, 
you can set other values as well. Finally, select Quit and then Save & Quit. 
All your default settings are now saved and will be used for all subsequent 
drawings.

Into the Third Dimension

So far, everything you've drawn has been flat, composed of line segments 
that all lie in the same two-dimensional plane. It's now time to start 
giving your objects depth.
	
Again get into the 3D Modeling Editor; use a filename of EXAMPLE2. Notice 
how your screen color is automatically set as you had it before, thanks to 
the DEFAULTS.NC3 file. Go into the drawing editor; the pen color is blue, 
and the cursor is a nice size. Create a current work object called cube, 
then select an overhead viewpoint using the <F5> key. Also notice how your 
drawing plane is now set to be top-bottom.
	
Draw a series of lines on the screen, arranged at right angles to form a 
square. Before closing the square, press the <S> key; this means "snap," 
and it'll make your cursor jump to the nearest existing point in your 
drawing. That helps you guarantee that the square will really be closed. 
Hold down <S>, and press the left mouse button to draw the final line. Then 
click the right mouse button to indicate that you're done.
	
If you're having trouble drawing the square with lines, you can create a 
polygon with four sides instead; the effect is the same, and you don't have 
to worry about getting the edges to meet (they do automatically).
	
Let's try an extrusion. Click on Model to go to the modeling menu, then 
select Extrude. You'll be prompted to choose an object to extrude; there 
should be only one object in the menu, called cube; select it. Turn 
perspective on using <F7>, then click on the Up item and Yes to confirm; 
this will extrude the cube vertically (toward you because you're looking 
down from above). Because perspective is on, you can see the sides of the 
cube; try toggling it using <F7> a few times to see the difference.
	
Finally, select the Viewpoint item; this will show you a set of coordinate 
axes that you can rotate in order to select a new viewing angle for the 
drawing. The T, R, and F labels refer to the top, right, and front 
directions respectively. Select a 3/4 view and click the mouse.
	
This cube looks like it's just a wireframe, but it's actually made up of a 
number of surfaces, as we'll see in a moment. Choose Files from the Main 
menu, and select Create PLG. Click on the New box, and enter example2. In 
this case, you'll use the same name for the PLG file as for the NorthCAD 
file, but they'll have different extensions and be in different directories; 
in general, they can be unrelated filenames. The file will be saved to disk; 
now return to the Main menu, select Quit then Save & Quit (to save the 
NorthCAD file, which is different from creating the PLG file). From the 
opening screen, select Quit Program to return to DOS, and then view the new 
object by typing the following command:

vrview example2.plg

Notice that it's entirely painted in an unshaded blue, which makes it hard 
to see; it also isn't a true cube, because it has no top or bottom yet. But 
it's a start.

Fixing the Cube

Go back into NorthCAD-3D and load EXAMPLE2 again. You're now going to close 
the box. Make sure you have a 3/4 view (use the Viewpoint menu item), then 
go to the Draw menu. Use the <P> as needed to make sure the top-bottom 
drawing plane is selected (we'll put a top and a bottom on the box). Select 
the Surfaces item; this lets you draw three-sided or four-sided flat polys. 
Notice how the graphics cursor is now being seen at an angle, because you're 
not looking at it straight on or from the side.
	
Move the graphics cursor near one of the top corners of the box, hold down 
the <S> key to snap the graphics cursor to the exact corner, and click the 
left mouse button. Stretch the rubber band to one of the adjacent top 
corners and click a second time, then move on to the next corner and click 
again. Notice that you're prompted to press <3> if you want a simple 
three-sided surface. In this case, you want four sides, so stretch the 
rubber band to the fourth corner and click again. Be sure you select your 
vertices in a consistent, counterclockwise order as you face the polygon. 
You've now added a top to the box.
	
Because drawing operations repeat automatically, you're ready to draw 
another surface. This time, click on one of the four bottom corners of the 
cube, and repeat for the remaining three. When prompted to create yet 
another surface, hit the right mouse button instead.
	
Return to the Main menu, then the File menu, and re-create the EXAMPLE2.PLG 
file. Then return to the Main menu, and exit the program (using Quit & Save 
to save the NorthCAD file).
	
You're now going to modify the cube using PLGX to eliminate duplicate 
vertices and paint it a nice shade of green:

plgx example2.plg cube.plg /v /p 0x1DEA

Take a look at it with VRVIEW, being sure to spin it around to see that 
it's now solid at top and bottom, and cosine-lit.

Creating a Building from the Ground Up

That sure was a lot of work to go through, just to make a cube. Wouldn't 
it have been easier to create it by hand? Well, yes, but building that cube 
in NorthCAD has also built the skills we need to create something far more 
complex.
	
Begin a new drawing, called EXAMPLE3. Go into the draw page, make your 
current object "building" and select the top-bottom viewpoint using <F5>. 
You're about to draw the floorplan of a new building.
	
Create a simple floorplan. No need to worry too much about the dimensions, 
but there is one very important thing to notice: any point where one wall 
joins another along its length must be constructed by splitting the wall at 
the point of contact.
	
Before you extrude this building, you're going to assign colors to some of 
the walls; this is done from the Edit menu. Select Edit; there are a number 
of items there that will let you erase individual lines, surfaces, entities, 
objects, or groups. There's also an item called Edit Color; select it now.
	
The resulting menu lets you tell NorthCAD what it is you want to change the 
color of; again, you can select any line, surface, entity, object, or group. 
In this case, select Chg Object and choose BUILDING. Confirm with Yes, and 
then pick a color; the entire set of lines making up the building will now 
be assigned that color. In this case, choose bright green (near the middle 
of the 16 colors).
	
Now you're going to alter specific line segments. Select Chg Line, and click 
on the line you want to alter; change its color, then repeat for other line 
segments. Try to make perpendicular lines different colors.
	
Go to the Model menu and select Extrude. Notice that you can set the 
extrusion distance; set it to 1200. Also notice that you can extrude in 
any direction; in this case, you want to extrude Up. Once you've done this, 
use the Viewpoint command to examine the building from all angles. Select a 
3/4 view.
	
You're about to paint a wall. Again choose Edit and Edit Color, but this 
time select Chg Surface. You'll need to pick two edges on a single surface, 
in order to uniquely identify the surface you want to change. Assign a new 
color to it.
	
Save the resulting drawing as a PLG file called EXAMPLE3. This time, have 
PLGX use a color conversion file to translate the colors:

plgx example3.plg tmp.plg /v /k northcad.ccv

This tells PLGX to "Konvert" the input file to the output file using the 
list of colors in the file NORTHCAD.CCV. That file has 16 lines in it, each 
corresponding to one of the 16 colors used by NorthCAD. Each line has a 
surface specifier that the color should correspond to. Note that the file 
can actually have up to 256 entries, to support the 256-color modes of 
NorthCAD.
	
The building is almost complete, but there's no roof or floor yet. Go back 
into NorthCAD and load EXAMPLE4 again. Select a 3/4 view, and draw a set of 
three-sided and four-sided surfaces to cover the open tops of the hallways 
in the building.
	
Repeat the procedure to add a floor; to avoid confusion, choose a different 
pen color than the one you used for the ceiling. You can save some time by 
imitating the "tiling" of the ceiling in the floor. Notice how useful it is 
that the surface-drawing command auto-repeats.
	
When you're done, create the EXAMPLE3.PLG file again and then Save and Quit. 
Convert, using PLGX as before, and view it using VRVIEW.

More About Extrusions

Any two-dimensional set of lines, arcs, and polygons can be extruded. Try 
extruding a polygon to form a column; notice how the ends are open, so it's 
more of a tube than a solid column. Extrude an arc to form an alcove, or a 
triangle (three-sided poly) to form a fulcrum. 

You Say You Want a Revolution...

Extrusion is one way to turn a flat shape into a solid; revolution is the 
other. Start a new drawing, called example4. Go into the Draw menu and 
select the Front-Back view using <F6>. Turn on the display of the coordinate 
axes using <F8>. As always, start by creating a current working object; in 
this case, call it column1.
	
Draw a vertical line (parallel to the z-axis) some distance away from the 
z-axis itself. Now choose Revolve from the Model menu; pick column1 as the 
object to revolve. Use Sections to specify the number of steps the 
revolution should go through; pick 16 for now. Click on Revolve, and confirm 
by clicking on Yes. Use the Viewpoint item to see your creation from various 
angles.
	
What you've done is revolve a line around the z-axis to sweep out a 
hollow tube. Of course, you could have done the same thing by extruding a 
16-sided polygon, but there's an advantage to doing it this way: you can 
close the cylinder at either or both ends automatically.
	
To see how this works, start by moving your new creation out of the way. 
Select Move from the Model menu, then Object and column1. Move the column to 
the right a ways. Press <F6> to return to the Front-Back view, then go to 
the Draw menu and create a new working object called column2.
	
Instead of a single line, create a "bracket" shape that hooks onto the 
z-axis; use the Lines item to create a cylinder shape. Notice how the 
horizontal lines end at the vertical z-axis. Go through the menus and 
Revolve column2. Shift your viewpoint to a 3/4 view, and notice how the top 
and bottom of this new column2 are made up of triangles that join at the 
z-axis. Save this drawing as a PLG file called EXAMPLE5, convert it using 
PLGX as before, and view it in VRVIEW. Notice that one of the cylinders is 
just a tube, and the other is solid. 

SUMMARY

NorthCAD-3D simplifies object creation, which is perhaps one of the most 
time-consuming tasks of world-building. Try using NorthCAD to build some 
common items to enhance your collection of objects and get some practice 
with this powerful software. Obviously, we've just scratched the surface of 
what you can do with this program. Again, we encourage you to register to 
receive the full version, which will also include more detailed 
documentation so you can push NorthCAD-3D to its very impressive limits.

(Thank you to Bernie Roehl, who wrote the preceding material on using 
NorthCAD-3D. This material appeared in a different version in his Waite 
Group Press book "Playing God: Creating Virtual Worlds with REND386," 
copyright 1994 by The Waite Group, Inc.)
	
